\documentclass[11pt, a4paper]{article}

\usepackage{natbib} %a package for better cite \citep for parenthetical (author, 0000) \citet for textual author (0000)
\bibliographystyle{abbrvnat}
\bibpunct{}{}{,}{s}{}{\textsuperscript{,}}
\renewcommand\bibnumfmt[1]{#1.}


\title{Algorithm}

\begin{document}
\maketitle

The ZFC analysis algorithm adopts the z-score of log2 fold change as
the judgement of the sgRNA and gene changes between reference group
(without treatment) and experiment group (with treatment). ZFC
supports screening with iBAR \citep{zhu_guide_2019} employed, as
well as conventional screening with replicates. The sgRNA with
replicates and sgRNA$^{iBAR}$ is treated with similar procedure.

\section{Normalization of raw counts}

In the ZFC algorithm, total-count normalization and median-ratio
normalization can be applied to the raw count data to normalize the
batch effects. Total count is applied to rectify the batch sequencing
depth for the normalization purpose of raw counts with an assumption
that the distributions of control and experiment groups remain scant
similar. And for a bidirectional screening, the enrichment genes might
greatly affect the distribution of experiment group. Median-ratio
normalization should be adopt instead of total-count normalization.

Because some sgRNAs in the reference have very low raw counts, which
can affect the fold change calculation of the following analysis. We
define sgRNAs counts less than 0.05 quantile both in reference group
and experiment group as the small count sgRNAs. The mean counts of all
the small count sgRNAs were added to the normalized counts. The
normalized counts for sgRNAs in reference group are calculated as
following expression:

$$Cn_{i} = \frac{Cr_{i}}{S_{ref}} \times 0.5 \times (S_{ref} + S_{exp})$$

$$C_{i} = Cn_{i} + Cm_{small}$$

where, $Cn_{i}$ is the normalized count of ith sgRNA$^{iBAR}$ in
reference group, $Cr_{i}$ is the raw count of ith sgRNA$^{iBAR}$,
$Cm_{small}$ is the mean counts of all the small count sgRNAs,
$S_{ref}$ is the sum of raw counts of all the sgRNA$^{iBAR}$ in
reference group, $S_{exp}$ is the sum of raw counts of all the
sgRNA$^{iBAR}$ in experiment group, $C_{i}$ is the final normalized
counts for ith sgRNA$^{iBAR}$ after small count adjustment. The
normalized counts for sgRNAs in experiment group are calculated
similarly.

\section{Calculate fold change}

The raw fold change of each sgRNA$^{iBAR}$ is calculated from the
normalized counts of reference and experiment groups.

$$fc_{i} = \frac{Cexp_{i}}{Cref_{i}}$$
$$lfc_{i} = \log_{2}fc_{i}$$

where, $fc_{i}$ is the fold change (FC) of ith sgRNA$^{iBAR}$ and
$lfc_{i}$ is the log2 fold change (LFC) of ith sgRNA$^{iBAR}$,
$Cref_{i}$ and $Cexp_{i}$ are the normalized counts of reference
and experiment groups respectively.

\section{Calculate fold change standard deviation}

In order to calculate z-score of LFC (ZLFC), the standard deviation of
LFC should be calculated. The LFC of sgRNA$^{iBAR}$ is related to the
normalized counts of reference group. So the standard deviations of
LFC are different for sgRNA$^{iBAR}$s with different normalized counts
of reference group. All the sgRNA$^{iBAR}$s are divided into several
sets according to the normalized counts of reference group. And the
standard deviations of log fold change are calculated among the
divided sets. The LFC standard deviation and the normalized counts of
the reference is linearly related. So, a linear model is calculated
for the LFC sd and reference counts. And the linear model is used to
calculate the LFC standard deviation for all the sgRNA$^{iBAR}$s.

\section{Raw z score of log fold change}

The raw z score of log fold change is calculated.

$$raw ZLFC = \frac{LFC}{LFC std}$$

sgRNA$^{iBAR}$ ZLFC p values are calculated from normal distribution.

\section{Calculate sgRNA mean z score of fold change}

The sgRNA level ZLFCs are calculated as the mean of all the ZLFCs of
the relevant sgRNA$^{iBAR}$s.

$$ZLFC_{sgRNA} = \frac{\sum{ZLFC_{sgRNA-iBAR}}}{n}$$

where, the sgRNA has $n$ sgRNA$^{iBAR}$s.

Empirical P value is also calculated for the sgRNA ZLFCs. The p value
is adjusted considering control of False Discovery Rate
\citep{benjamini_controlling_1995}.

\section{Calculate gene mean z score of fold change}

The gene level ZLFCs are calculated as the mean of all the ZLFCs of
the relevant sgRNAs.

$$ZLFC_{gene} = \frac{\sum{ZLFC_{sgRNA}}}{m}$$

where, the gene has $m$ sgRNAs.

Empirical P value is also calculated for the gene ZLFCs. The p value
is adjusted considering control of False Discovery Rate
\citep{benjamini_controlling_1995}.


\section{Robust rank aggregation analysis}


Robust rank aggregation \citep{kolde_robust_2012} is utilized to
calculate the rank significance of the sgRNA and gene with the
sgRNA$^{iBAR}$s in the whole library. Aside from robust rank
aggregation, mean rank aggregation is also calculated. The robust rank
score is adjusted considering control of False Discovery Rate
\citep{benjamini_controlling_1995}.

\bibliography{al}

\end{document}


%%% Local Variables:
%%% mode: latex
%%% TeX-master: t
%%% End:
